SIG/Network - tutorial - "Your first network component" (#771)
o3de/o3de.org: content/docs/user-guide/gems/reference/multiplayer/multiplayer/tutorial_multiplayer.md

---
title: Tutorial - Your First Network Component
linktitle: Tutorial Multiplayer

> description: Use Multiplayer Gem to create multiplayer components.

Author: Sounds good, adding.

toc: true
---

## Introduction

This tutorial will link all the relevant documentation to provide you with a detailed guide on getting started with creating multiplayer components.

> Our starting base will be O3DE MultiplayerSample project. You can find the instructions on how to build and run it here: https://github.com/o3de/o3de-multiplayersample/blob/development/README.md

Reviewer: NP: will be the O3DE

Author: Fixing.

## Network Components

### Add a New Component

> We will start by creating a network component - MyFirstNetworkComponent. It will only do one thing, which is to replicate a monotonic counter.

Reviewer 2: Is there real-world benefit for sending round trip uptime between auth and clients? Seems like it could be used for prediction? If there is real-world use could you provide an example?

Author: No, there is not any real use. I chose it for its extreme simplicity. Everyone in development space knows about incremental counters. So it should be easy to understand. We can tackle more useful game logic in a different follow-up tutorial that builds on this tutorial.

Since we already have MultiplayerSample setup for codegen, we can start by duplicating one of the existing codegen xml files.

> `D:\git\o3de-multiplayersample\Gem\Code\Source\AutoGen\SimplePlayerCameraComponent.AutoComponent.xml`

Reviewer: Unsure if there is a standard for this but do we want the full path as above or a relative one that starts with o3de-multiplayersample?

Author: That is a good question. My view is that the path doesn't show any personal details from my computer and could apply to everyone, and I don't have to deal with the question: is the path inside the project or inside the engine. But maybe \path\to\o3de-multiplayersample is better than D:\git\o3de-multiplayersample ?

Author: I'll go with \path\to\o3de-multiplayersample for now.

Reviewer: I like that a lot actually

into 

> `D:\git\o3de-multiplayersample\Gem\Code\Source\AutoGen\MyFirstNetworkComponent.AutoComponent.xml`

Reviewer: Is this really necessary since you're giving the body of the xml below anyway? Why not just have them make the file?

Author: It's my personally philosophy to over provide full details in tutorials, so it's easy to go back and use it as a reference and a guide. I don't want readers to create a file and make a mistakes due to missing something in their understanding. It makes the tutorial longer but has more chances to teach new folks.

3>Total Time 0:00:00.01
3>MyFirstNetworkComponent.AutoComponent.cpp
3>AutoComponentTypes.cpp
3>D:\git\o3de\build\-86ba765d\Gem\Code\Azcg\Generated\Source\AutoGen\AutoComponentTypes.cpp(14,10): fatal error C1083: Cannot open include file: 'Source/Components/MyFirstNetworkComponent.h': No such file or directory
3>#include <Source/Components/MyFirstNetworkComponent.h>
3>         ^
3>D:\git\o3de\build\-86ba765d\Gem\Code\Azcg\Generated\Source\AutoGen\MyFirstNetworkComponent.AutoComponent.cpp(20,10): fatal error C1083: Cannot open include file: 'Source/Components/MyFirstNetworkComponent.h': No such file or directory
3>#include <Source/Components/MyFirstNetworkComponent.h>
3>         ^
3>Done building project "MultiplayerSample.Static.vcxproj" -- FAILED.
```

> The failure is expected, we have not written our code on top of the code-generated files. Let's first notice what we did get so far:

Reviewer: It might be good to warn the failure is expected before the build output so the user isn't surprised by it.

Author: Good idea, will do.

        static void Reflect(AZ::ReflectContext* context);

        void OnInit() override;
        void OnActivate(Multiplayer::EntityIsMigrating entityIsMigrating) override;
        void OnDeactivate(Multiplayer::EntityIsMigrating entityIsMigrating) override;

        
        
        
    protected:
        
    };

}
/// Place in your .cpp
#include <Source/Components/MyFirstNetworkComponent.h>

namespace MultiplayerSample
{
    void MyFirstNetworkComponent::Reflect(AZ::ReflectContext* context)
    {
        AZ::SerializeContext* serializeContext = azrtti_cast<AZ::SerializeContext*>(context);
        if (serializeContext)
        {
            serializeContext->Class<MyFirstNetworkComponent, MyFirstNetworkComponentBase>()
                ->Version(1);
        }
        MyFirstNetworkComponentBase::Reflect(context);
    }

    void MyFirstNetworkComponent::OnInit()
    {
    }

    void MyFirstNetworkComponent::OnActivate([[maybe_unused]] Multiplayer::EntityIsMigrating entityIsMigrating)
    {
    }

    void MyFirstNetworkComponent::OnDeactivate([[maybe_unused]] Multiplayer::EntityIsMigrating entityIsMigrating)
    {
    }

}
*/
```

> That is our start base. We can copy paste that code into `D:\git\o3de-multiplayersample\Gem\Code\Source\Components\MyFirstNetworkComponent.h` and `D:\git\o3de-multiplayersample\Gem\Code\Source\Components\MyFirstNetworkComponent.cpp`.

Reviewer: NP: starter or starting

Author: Fixing.

Add these files to `D:\git\o3de-multiplayersample\Gem\Code\multiplayersample_files.cmake`:

```
set(FILES
...
    Source/Components/MyFirstNetworkComponent.cpp
    Source/Components/MyFirstNetworkComponent.h
```

Now, MultiplayerSample project should compile without any issues. You should be able to see the new component in the Editor.

> ![My First Network Component in the Editor](/images/user-guide/multiplayer/my_first_network_component_in_editor.png)

Author: It shows up in the preview: https://deploy-preview-771--o3deorg.netlify.app/docs/user-guide/gems/reference/multiplayer/multiplayer/tutorial_multiplayer/ so I think it's all good.

Additionally, you can find the generated files and your XML file in Visual Studio:

> ![Generated Code in Visual Studio](/images/user-guide/multiplayer/visualstudio_generated_files_for_myfirstnetworkcomponent.png)

Author: It shows up in the preview: https://deploy-preview-771--o3deorg.netlify.app/docs/user-guide/gems/reference/multiplayer/multiplayer/tutorial_multiplayer/ so I think it's all good.

                   Init="0.0"
                   ReplicateFrom="Authority"
                   ReplicateTo="Client"
```

One can think of the above as if expressed in a C++ way:

```c++
double m_UpTime = 0.0; // replicate from Authority to Client
```

{{<note>}}
For now, we can think of `Authority` as the multiplayer server. `Authority` to `Client` is the most common direction of replication.
{{</note>}}

Now in `MyFirstNetworkComponent` we can access `UpTime` via GetUpTime() method on clients.
On the authority server we can set the value of `UpTime` by accessing the controller of our component - `MyFirstNetworkComponentController`. For example:

```c++
    void MyFirstNetworkComponent::OnTick( [[maybe_unused]] float deltaTime, AZ::ScriptTimePoint time )
    {
        if ( HasController() )
        {
            auto* controller = static_cast<MyFirstNetworkComponentController*>( GetController() );
            controller->ModifyUpTime() = time.GetSeconds();
            AZ_Printf( "MyFirstNetworkComponent", "server = %f", GetUpTime() );
        }
        else
        {
            AZ_Printf( "MyFirstNetworkComponent", "client = %f", GetUpTime() );
        }
    }
```

> A controller only exists on the authority server, thus this effectively splits the execution into server-only and client-only logic. 

Author: Correct but I don't want to introduce all concepts all at once. So I tackle that later on in the guide.

        {
            serializeContext->Class<MyFirstNetworkComponent, MyFirstNetworkComponentBase>()
                ->Version( 1 );
        }
        MyFirstNetworkComponentBase::Reflect( context );
    }

    void MyFirstNetworkComponent::OnInit()
    {
    }

    void MyFirstNetworkComponent::OnActivate( [[maybe_unused]] Multiplayer::EntityIsMigrating entityIsMigrating )
    {
        AZ::TickBus::Handler::BusConnect();
    }

    void MyFirstNetworkComponent::OnDeactivate( [[maybe_unused]] Multiplayer::EntityIsMigrating entityIsMigrating )
    {
        AZ::TickBus::Handler::BusDisconnect();
    }

    void MyFirstNetworkComponent::OnTick( [[maybe_unused]] float deltaTime, AZ::ScriptTimePoint time )
    {
        if ( HasController() )
        {
            auto* controller = static_cast<MyFirstNetworkComponentController*>( GetController() );
            controller->ModifyUpTime() = time.GetSeconds();
            AZ_Printf( "MyFirstNetworkComponent", "server = %f", GetUpTime() );
        }
        else
        {
            AZ_Printf( "MyFirstNetworkComponent", "client = %f", GetUpTime() );
        }
    }
}
```

### Listen for Network Property Changes on Clients

> However, let's improve on this. A client has no need to tick, it can instead listen for changes. In order to do that, we need to enable `GenerateEventBindings`.

Reviewer 2: nice! get things working, and then slowly introduce new concepts that help build even better code.

This is what we have at the moment.

```xml
  <NetworkProperty Type="double"
                   Name="UpTime"
...
                   GenerateEventBindings="false"
...
                    />
```

If `GenerateEventBindings` is instead set to true, 

```xml
  <NetworkProperty Type="double"
                   Name="UpTime"
...
                   GenerateEventBindings="true"
...
                    />
```

> It will add code generated for us a new method: `UpTimeAddEvent`. Let's put it to use and modify our code.

Reviewer 2: ... it will generate a new method:

Author: Fixing.

    void MyFirstNetworkComponent::OnUpTimeChanged( double uptime )
    {
        AZ_Printf( "MyFirstNetworkComponent", "client = %f", uptime );
    }
}
```

### Network Component Controllers

Let's improve on the separation between server and client code. At the moment, `MyFirstNetworkComponent` performs both server and client duties. Let's break it up. In O3DE Multiplayer, the way to do that is by using `controllers`. A controller does not exist on `Client` roles but does exist on Authority role. We already saw a glipmse into that in our previous examples:

```c++
auto* controller = static_cast<MyFirstNetworkComponentController*>( GetController() );
```

Going back to XML, the controller were mentioned in the attribute `OverrideController`:

```xml
<Component Name="MyFirstNetworkComponent"
           Namespace="MultiplayerSample"
           OverrideComponent="true"
           OverrideController="false"
```

Now that we wish to do some custom work with the controller, we will flip `OverrideController` to true.

```xml
<Component Name="MyFirstNetworkComponent"
           Namespace="MultiplayerSample"
           OverrideComponent="true"
           OverrideController="true"
```

> When attempt to build the code, you will get compile errors but that is because the code now expects us to override the controller base class. In fact, if you look into the code generated header, `D:\git\o3de\build\-86ba765d\Gem\Code\Azcg\Generated\Source\AutoGen\MyFirstNetworkComponent.AutoComponent.h`, like we did before, you will see that large comment has changed to add controller:

Reviewer 2: After attempting

Author: Fixing.

> When attempt to build the code, you will get compile errors but that is because the code now expects us to override the controller base class. In fact, if you look into the code generated header, `D:\git\o3de\build\-86ba765d\Gem\Code\Azcg\Generated\Source\AutoGen\MyFirstNetworkComponent.AutoComponent.h`, like we did before, you will see that large comment has changed to add controller:

Reviewer: NP: attempt -> attempting

Author: Fixing.

/// You may use the classes below as a basis for your new derived classes. Derived classes must be marked in MyFirstNetworkComponent.AutoComponent.xml
/*
    class MyFirstNetworkComponentController
        : public MyFirstNetworkComponentControllerBase
    {
    public:
        MyFirstNetworkComponentController(MyFirstNetworkComponent& parent);

        void OnActivate(Multiplayer::EntityIsMigrating entityIsMigrating) override;
        void OnDeactivate(Multiplayer::EntityIsMigrating entityIsMigrating) override;
    };

    MyFirstNetworkComponentController::MyFirstNetworkComponentController(MyFirstNetworkComponent& parent)
        : MyFirstNetworkComponentControllerBase(parent)
    {
    }

    void MyFirstNetworkComponentController::OnActivate([[maybe_unused]] Multiplayer::EntityIsMigrating entityIsMigrating)
    {
    }

    void MyFirstNetworkComponentController::OnDeactivate([[maybe_unused]] Multiplayer::EntityIsMigrating entityIsMigrating)
    {
    }
*/
```

Let's add this content to our existing `D:\git\o3de-multiplayersample\Gem\Code\Source\Components\MyFirstNetworkComponent.h` and `D:\git\o3de-multiplayersample\Gem\Code\Source\Components\MyFirstNetworkComponent.cpp`.

> Once you do, you can move then move all the server logic into `MyFirstNetworkComponentController` and keep client logic in `MyFirstNetworkComponent`. Here is the result.

Reviewer 2: One you do, you can move all the server logic...

Author: Fixing.

                   IsPredictable="true"
                   IsPublic="true"
                   Container="Object"
                   ExposeToEditor="false"
                   ExposeToScript="false"
                   GenerateEventBindings="true"
                   Description="Time since the start of the application" />
</Component>
```

And now we have a clean separation between server and client logic for our component.

### Add a Remote Procedure Call

Now that we have created a data flow from the server to clients, let's reverse the direction with a remote procedure call. Building from the previous example, whenever a client gets new `UpTime` it will call a new RPC - `SendConfirmUptime` and send the value it got back to the server. Just for fun.

```xml
  <RemoteProcedure Name="SendConfirmUptime"
                   InvokeFrom="Autonomous"
                   HandleOn="Authority"
                   IsPublic="false"
                   IsReliable="false"
                   GenerateEventBindings="false"
                   Description="Uptime confirmed by the client">
    <Param Type="double"
           Name="UpTime" />
  </RemoteProcedure>
```

{{<important>}}

> Notice that InvokeFrom is not `Client` but `Autonomous`. `Autonomous` is a special type of client behavior where a client initiates an action and may send data to the server. A common example is a player character controller and actions that has to be able to act on its own. Meanwhile, 'Client' only mirrors what the server tells them to do.

Reviewer 2: 'Autonomous' is commonly used for player character controllers; in this case the player has to be able to act on its own without waiting for the server to tell it what to do.

Author: Sounds good, fixing.

> By default, only the player prefab is marked as Autonomous, so we will move `MyFirstNetworkComponent` to the player prefab for this tutorial.

Reviewer 2: There hasn't been any mention of the player prefab until now.  Might be worth providing the path: _D:\git\o3de-multiplayersample\Prefabs\Player.prefab_

Author: Good point, adding a note.

{{</important>}}

> If you rebuild `MultiplayerSample.Static` project, you will notice that the generated header for our component, `D:\git\o3de\build\MultiplayerSample-6db9bd97\Gem\Code\Azcg\Generated\Source\AutoGen\MyFirstNetworkComponent.AutoComponent.h`, has adding a new empty virtual method in the large comment block for `MyFirstNetworkComponentController`:

Reviewer 2: , has **added** a new empty...

Author: Fixing.

```c++
class MyFirstNetworkComponentController
...

    void HandleSendConfirmUptime(AzNetworking::IConnection* invokingConnection, const double& UpTime) override {}
```

> We can take note of this and provite our own implementation of it:

Reviewer 2: provite -> provide

Author: Fixing.

        void OnDeactivate(Multiplayer::EntityIsMigrating entityIsMigrating) override;

        void OnTick( float deltaTime, AZ::ScriptTimePoint time ) override;

        void HandleSendConfirmUptime(AzNetworking::IConnection* invokingConnection, const double& UpTime) override;
    };
}
```

The source `D:\git\MultiplayerSample\Gem\Code\Source\Components\MyFirstNetworkComponent.cpp`:
```c++
#include <Source/Components/MyFirstNetworkComponent.h>

#include <AzCore/Serialization/SerializeContext.h>
#include <Multiplayer/Components/NetBindComponent.h>

namespace MultiplayerSample
{
    void MyFirstNetworkComponent::Reflect(AZ::ReflectContext* context)
    {
        AZ::SerializeContext* serializeContext = azrtti_cast<AZ::SerializeContext*>(context);
        if (serializeContext)
        {
            serializeContext->Class<MyFirstNetworkComponent, MyFirstNetworkComponentBase>()
                ->Version(1);
        }
        MyFirstNetworkComponentBase::Reflect(context);
    }

    MyFirstNetworkComponent::MyFirstNetworkComponent()
        : m_uptimeChanged([this](double uptime) { OnUpTimeChanged(uptime); })
    {
        if (IsNetEntityRoleAuthority())
        {

>             GetNetBindComponent()->SetAllowAutonomy(true);

Reviewer 2: this isn't required if this component is attached to the player prefab right? you already mention above to be sure to attach this component to the player.prefab, so i think we need to remove this line?

Author: Good point, removing.

---

> title: Tutorial - Your First Network Component
> linktitle: Tutorial Multiplayer
> description: Use Multiplayer Gem to create multiplayer components.

Reviewer 3: As suggested in the link from the Gem reference, change this filename to `first-network-component.md` and move to `learning-guide/tutorials/multiplayer`.
```suggestion
title: Your First Network Component
description: Learn how to use the Multiplayer Gem in Open 3D Engine (O3DE) to create multiplayer components.
```
Then add a link in the intro to the Gem.

You'll also need to add an _index.md in the new multiplayer tutorial directory that introduces the section, since this is the first multiplayer tutorial. See the AI tutorial directory for an example.

## Network Components

### Add a New Component

We will start by creating a network component - MyFirstNetworkComponent. It will only do one thing, which is to replicate a monotonic counter.

Since we already have MultiplayerSample setup for codegen, we can start by duplicating one of the existing codegen xml files.

`\path\to\o3de-multiplayersample\Gem\Code\Source\AutoGen\SimplePlayerCameraComponent.AutoComponent.xml`

into 

`\path\to\o3de-multiplayersample\Gem\Code\Source\AutoGen\MyFirstNetworkComponent.AutoComponent.xml`

```xml
<Component Name="MyFirstNetworkComponent"
           Namespace="MultiplayerSample"
           OverrideComponent="true"
           OverrideController="false"
           OverrideInclude="Source/Components/MyFirstNetworkComponent.h"
           xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance">
</Component>
```

Go to `\path\to\o3de-multiplayersample\Gem\Code\multiplayersample_files.cmake` and add your new xml file:

```
set(FILES
...
    Source/AutoGen/MyFirstNetworkComponent.AutoComponent.xml
```

> Re-run cmake configure for your O3DE project, or build `MultiplayerSample.Static`. The failure will be expected, since we have not written our code on top of the code-generated files.

Reviewer: NP: A failure is expected

Author: Fixing.
